Computer security also cybersecurity, digital security, or information technology IT security is the protection of computer software, systems and networks from threats that can lead to unauthorized information disclosure, theft or damage to hardware, software, or data, as well as from the disruption or misdirection of the services they provide.12 The significance of the field stems from the expanded reliance on computer systems, the Internet,3 and wireless network standards. Its importance is further amplified by the growth of smart devices, including smartphones, televisions, and the various devices that constitute the Internet of things IoT. Cybersecurity has emerged as one of the most significant new challenges facing the contemporary world, due to both the complexity of information systems and the societies they support. Security is particularly crucial for systems that govern largescale systems with farreaching physical effects, such as power distribution, elections, and finance.45 Although many aspects of computer security involve digital security, such as electronic passwords and encryption, physical security measures such as metal locks are still used to prevent unauthorized tampering. IT security is not a perfect subset of information security, therefore does not completely align into the security convergence schema. A vulnerability refers to a flaw in the structure, execution, functioning, or internal oversight of a computer or system that compromises its security. Most of the vulnerabilities that have been discovered are documented in the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures CVE database.6 An exploitable vulnerability is one for which at least one working attack or exploit exists.7 Actors maliciously seeking vulnerabilities are known as threats. Vulnerabilities can be researched, reverseengineered, hunted, or exploited using automated tools or customized scripts.89 Various people or parties are vulnerable to cyber attacks however, different groups are likely to experience different types of attacks more than others.10 In April 2023, the United Kingdom Department for Science, Innovation Technology released a report on cyber attacks over the last 12 months.11 They surveyed 2,263 UK businesses, 1,174 UK registered charities, and 554 education institutions. The research found that 32 of businesses and 24 of charities overall recall any breaches or attacks from the last 12 months. These figures were much higher for medium businesses 59, large businesses 69, and highincome charities with 500,000 or more in annual income 56.11 Yet, although medium or large businesses are more often the victims, since larger companies have generally improved their security over the last decade, small and midsize businesses SMBs have also become increasingly vulnerable as they often do not have advanced tools to defend the business.10 SMBs are most likely to be affected by malware, ransomware, phishing, maninthemiddle attacks, and Denialof Service DoS Attacks.10 Normal internet users are most likely to be affected by untargeted cyberattacks.12 These are where attackers indiscriminately target as many devices, services, or users as possible. They do this using techniques that take advantage of the openness of the Internet. These strategies mostly include phishing, ransomware, water holing and scanning.12 To secure a computer system, it is important to understand the attacks that can be made against it, and these threats can typically be classified into one of the following categories A backdoor in a computer system, a cryptosystem, or an algorithm is any secret method of bypassing normal authentication or security controls. These weaknesses may exist for many reasons, including original design or poor configuration.13 Due to the nature of backdoors, they are of greater concern to companies and databases as opposed to individuals. Backdoors may be added by an authorized party to allow some legitimate access or by an attacker for malicious reasons. Criminals often use malware to install backdoors, giving them remote administrative access to a system.14 Once they have access, cybercriminals can modify files, steal personal information, install unwanted software, and even take control of the entire computer.14 Backdoors can be very hard to detect and are usually discovered by someone who has access to the application source code or intimate knowledge of the operating system of the computer. Denialofservice attacks DoS are designed to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users.15 Attackers can deny service to individual victims, such as by deliberately entering a wrong password enough consecutive times to cause the victims account to be locked, or they may overload the capabilities of a machine or network and block all users at once. While a network attack from a single IP address can be blocked by adding a new firewall rule, many forms of distributed denialofservice DDoS attacks are possible, where the attack comes from a large number of points. In this case, defending against these attacks is much more difficult. Such attacks can originate from the zombie computers of a botnet or from a range of other possible techniques, including distributed reflective denialofservice DRDoS, where innocent systems are fooled into sending traffic to the victim.15 With such attacks, the amplification factor makes the attack easier for the attacker because they have to use little bandwidth themselves. To understand why attackers may carry out these attacks, see the attacker motivation section. A directaccess attack is when an unauthorized user an attacker gains physical access to a computer, most likely to directly copy data from it or steal information.16 Attackers may also compromise security by making operating system modifications, installing software worms, keyloggers, covert listening devices or using wireless microphones. Even when the system is protected by standard security measures, these may be bypassed by booting another operating system or tool from a CDROM or other bootable media. Disk encryption and the Trusted Platform Module standard are designed to prevent these attacks. Direct service attackers are related in concept to direct memory attacks which allow an attacker to gain direct access to a computers memory.17 The attacks take advantage of a feature of modern computers that allows certain devices, such as external hard drives, graphics cards, or network cards, to access the computers memory directly.17 Eavesdropping is the act of surreptitiously listening to a private computer conversation communication, usually between hosts on a network. It typically occurs when a user connects to a network where traffic is not secured or encrypted and sends sensitive business data to a colleague, which, when listened to by an attacker, could be exploited.18 Data transmitted across an open network allows an attacker to exploit a vulnerability and intercept it via various methods. Unlike malware, directaccess attacks, or other forms of cyber attacks, eavesdropping attacks are unlikely to negatively affect the performance of networks or devices, making them difficult to notice.18 In fact, the attacker does not need to have any ongoing connection to the software at all. The attacker can insert the software onto a compromised device, perhaps by direct insertion or perhaps by a virus or other malware, and then come back some time later to retrieve any data that is found or trigger the software to send the data at some determined time.19 Using a virtual private network VPN, which encrypts data between two points, is one of the most common forms of protection against eavesdropping. Using the best form of encryption possible for wireless networks is best practice, as well as using HTTPS instead of an unencrypted HTTP.20 Programs such as Carnivore and NarusInSight have been used by the Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI and NSA to eavesdrop on the systems of internet service providers. Even machines that operate as a closed system i.e., with no contact with the outside world can be eavesdropped upon by monitoring the faint electromagnetic transmissions generated by the hardware. TEMPEST is a specification by the NSA referring to these attacks. Malicious software malware is any software code or computer program intentionally written to harm a computer system or its users.21 Once present on a computer, it can leak sensitive details such as personal information, business information and passwords, can give control of the system to the attacker, and can corrupt or delete data permanently.22 Another type of malware is ransomware, which is when malware installs itself onto a victims machine, encrypts their files, and then turns around and demands a ransom usually in Bitcoin to return that data to the user.23 Types of malware include some of the following Maninthemiddle attacks MITM involve a malicious attacker trying to intercept, surveil or modify communications between two parties by spoofing one or both partys identities and injecting themselves inbetween.24 Types of MITM attacks include Surfacing in 2017, a new class of multivector,25 polymorphic26 cyber threats combine several types of attacks and change form to avoid cybersecurity controls as they spread. Multivector polymorphic attacks, as the name describes, are both multivectored and polymorphic.27 Firstly, they are a singular attack that involves multiple methods of attack. In this sense, they are multivectored i.e. the attack can use multiple means of propagation such as via the Web, email and applications. However, they are also multistaged, meaning that they can infiltrate networks and move laterally inside the network.27 The attacks can be polymorphic, meaning that the cyberattacks used such as viruses, worms or trojans constantly change morph making it nearly impossible to detect them using signaturebased defences.27 Phishing is the attempt of acquiring sensitive information such as usernames, passwords, and credit card details directly from users by deceiving the users.28 Phishing is typically carried out by email spoofing, instant messaging, text message, or on a phone call. They often direct users to enter details at a fake website whose look and feel are almost identical to the legitimate one.29 The fake website often asks for personal information, such as login details and passwords. This information can then be used to gain access to the individuals real account on the real website. Preying on a victims trust, phishing can be classified as a form of social engineering. Attackers can use creative ways to gain access to real accounts. A common scam is for attackers to send fake electronic invoices30 to individuals showing that they recently purchased music, apps, or others, and instructing them to click on a link if the purchases were not authorized. A more strategic type of phishing is spearphishing which leverages personal or organizationspecific details to make the attacker appear like a trusted source. Spearphishing attacks target specific individuals, rather than the broad net cast by phishing attempts.31 Privilege escalation describes a situation where an attacker with some level of restricted access is able to, without authorization, elevate their privileges or access level.32 For example, a standard computer user may be able to exploit a vulnerability in the system to gain access to restricted data or even become root and have full unrestricted access to a system. The severity of attacks can range from attacks simply sending an unsolicited email to a ransomware attack on large amounts of data. Privilege escalation usually starts with social engineering techniques, often phishing.32 Privilege escalation can be separated into two strategies, horizontal and vertical privilege escalation Any computational system affects its environment in some form. This effect it has on its environment can range from electromagnetic radiation, to residual effect on RAM cells which as a consequence make a Cold boot attack possible, to hardware implementation faults that allow for access or guessing of other values that normally should be inaccessible. In Sidechannel attack scenarios, the attacker would gather such information about a system or network to guess its internal state and as a result access the information which is assumed by the victim to be secure. The target information in a side channel can be challenging to detect due to its low amplitude when combined with other signals 33 Social engineering, in the context of computer security, aims to convince a user to disclose secrets such as passwords, card numbers, etc. or grant physical access by, for example, impersonating a senior executive, bank, a contractor, or a customer.34 This generally involves exploiting peoples trust, and relying on their cognitive biases. A common scam involves emails sent to accounting and finance department personnel, impersonating their CEO and urgently requesting some action. One of the main techniques of social engineering are phishing attacks. In early 2016, the FBI reported that such business email compromise BEC scams had cost US businesses more than 2 billion in about two years.35 In May 2016, the Milwaukee Bucks NBA team was the victim of this type of cyber scam with a perpetrator impersonating the teams president Peter Feigin, resulting in the handover of all the teams employees 2015 W2 tax forms.36 Spoofing is an act of pretending to be a valid entity through the falsification of data such as an IP address or username, in order to gain access to information or resources that one is otherwise unauthorized to obtain. Spoofing is closely related to phishing.3738 There are several types of spoofing, including In 2018, the cybersecurity firm Trellix published research on the lifethreatening risk of spoofing in the healthcare industry.40 Tampering describes a malicious modification or alteration of data. It is an intentional but unauthorized act resulting in the modification of a system, components of systems, its intended behavior, or data. Socalled Evil Maid attacks and security services planting of surveillance capability into routers are examples.41 HTML smuggling allows an attacker to smuggle a malicious code inside a particular HTML or web page.42 HTML files can carry payloads concealed as benign, inert data in order to defeat content filters. These payloads can be reconstructed on the other side of the filter.43 When a target user opens the HTML, the malicious code is activated the web browser then decodes the script, which then unleashes the malware onto the targets device.42 Employee behavior can have a big impact on information security in organizations. Cultural concepts can help different segments of the organization work effectively or work against effectiveness toward information security within an organization. Information security culture is the ...totality of patterns of behavior in an organization that contributes to the protection of information of all kinds.44 Andersson and Reimers 2014 found that employees often do not see themselves as part of their organizations information security effort and often take actions that impede organizational changes.45 Indeed, the Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report 2020, which examined 3,950 security breaches, discovered 30 of cybersecurity incidents involved internal actors within a company.46 Research shows information security culture needs to be improved continuously. In Information Security Culture from Analysis to Change, authors commented, Its a neverending process, a cycle of evaluation and change or maintenance. To manage the information security culture, five steps should be taken preevaluation, strategic planning, operative planning, implementation, and postevaluation.47 In computer security, a countermeasure is an action, device, procedure or technique that reduces a threat, a vulnerability, or an attack by eliminating or preventing it, by minimizing the harm it can cause, or by discovering and reporting it so that corrective action can be taken.484950 Some common countermeasures are listed in the following sections Security by design, or alternately secure by design, means that the software has been designed from the ground up to be secure. In this case, security is considered a main feature. The UK governments National Cyber Security Centre separates secure cyber design principles into five sections51 These design principles of security by design can include some of the following techniques Security architecture can be defined as the practice of designing computer systems to achieve security goals.52 These goals have overlap with the principles of security by design explored above, including to make initial compromise of the system difficult, and to limit the impact of any compromise.52 In practice, the role of a security architect would be to ensure the structure of a system reinforces the security of the system, and that new changes are safe and meet the security requirements of the organization.5354 Similarly, Techopedia defines security architecture as a unified security design that addresses the necessities and potential risks involved in a certain scenario or environment. It also specifies when and where to apply security controls. The design process is generally reproducible. The key attributes of security architecture are55 Practicing security architecture provides the right foundation to systematically address business, IT and security concerns in an organization. A state of computer security is the conceptual ideal, attained by the use of three processes threat prevention, detection, and response. These processes are based on various policies and system components, which include the following Today, computer security consists mainly of preventive measures, like firewalls or an exit procedure. A firewall can be defined as a way of filtering network data between a host or a network and another network, such as the Internet. They can be implemented as software running on the machine, hooking into the network stack or, in the case of most UNIXbased operating systems such as Linux, built into the operating system kernel to provide realtime filtering and blocking.56 Another implementation is a socalled physical firewall, which consists of a separate machine filtering network traffic. Firewalls are common amongst machines that are permanently connected to the Internet. Some organizations are turning to big data platforms, such as Apache Hadoop, to extend data accessibility and machine learning to detect advanced persistent threats.58 In order to ensure adequate security, the confidentiality, integrity and availability of a network, better known as the CIA triad, must be protected and is considered the foundation to information security.59 To achieve those objectives, administrative, physical and technical security measures should be employed. The amount of security afforded to an asset can only be determined when its value is known.60 Vulnerability management is the cycle of identifying, fixing or mitigating vulnerabilities,61 especially in software and firmware. Vulnerability management is integral to computer security and network security. Vulnerabilities can be discovered with a vulnerability scanner, which analyzes a computer system in search of known vulnerabilities,62 such as open ports, insecure software configuration, and susceptibility to malware. In order for these tools to be effective, they must be kept up to date with every new update the vendor release. Typically, these updates will scan for the new vulnerabilities that were introduced recently. Beyond vulnerability scanning, many organizations contract outside security auditors to run regular penetration tests against their systems to identify vulnerabilities. In some sectors, this is a contractual requirement.63 The act of assessing and reducing vulnerabilities to cyber attacks is commonly referred to as information technology security assessments. They aim to assess systems for risk and to predict and test for their vulnerabilities. While formal verification of the correctness of computer systems is possible,6465 it is not yet common. Operating systems formally verified include seL4,66 and SYSGOs PikeOS6768 but these make up a very small percentage of the market. It is possible to reduce an attackers chances by keeping systems up to date with security patches and updates and by hiring people with expertise in security. Large companies with significant threats can hire Security Operations Centre SOC Analysts. These are specialists in cyber defences, with their role ranging from conducting threat analysis to investigating reports of any new issues and preparing and testing disaster recovery plans.69 Whilst no measures can completely guarantee the prevention of an attack, these measures can help mitigate the damage of possible attacks. The effects of data lossdamage can be also reduced by careful backing up and insurance. Outside of formal assessments, there are various methods of reducing vulnerabilities. Two factor authentication is a method for mitigating unauthorized access to a system or sensitive information.70 It requires something you know a password or PIN, and something you have a card, dongle, cellphone, or another piece of hardware. This increases security as an unauthorized person needs both of these to gain access. Protecting against social engineering and direct computer access physical attacks can only happen by noncomputer means, which can be difficult to enforce, relative to the sensitivity of the information. Training is often involved to help mitigate this risk by improving peoples knowledge of how to protect themselves and by increasing peoples awareness of threats.71 However, even in highly disciplined environments e.g. military organizations, social engineering attacks can still be difficult to foresee and prevent. Inoculation, derived from inoculation theory, seeks to prevent social engineering and other fraudulent tricks and traps by instilling a resistance to persuasion attempts through exposure to similar or related attempts.72 Hardwarebased or assisted computer security also offers an alternative to softwareonly computer security. Using devices and methods such as dongles, trusted platform modules, intrusionaware cases, drive locks, disabling USB ports, and mobileenabled access may be considered more secure due to the physical access or sophisticated backdoor access required in order to be compromised. Each of these is covered in more detail below. One use of the term computer security refers to technology that is used to implement secure operating systems. Using secure operating systems is a good way of ensuring computer security. These are systems that have achieved certification from an external securityauditing organization, the most popular evaluations are Common Criteria CC.86 In software engineering, secure coding aims to guard against the accidental introduction of security vulnerabilities. It is also possible to create software designed from the ground up to be secure. Such systems are secure by design. Beyond this, formal verification aims to prove the correctness of the algorithms underlying a system87 important for cryptographic protocols for example. Within computer systems, two of the main security models capable of enforcing privilege separation are access control lists ACLs and rolebased access control RBAC. An accesscontrol list ACL, with respect to a computer file system, is a list of permissions associated with an object. An ACL specifies which users or system processes are granted access to objects, as well as what operations are allowed on given objects. Rolebased access control is an approach to restricting system access to authorized users,888990 used by the majority of enterprises with more than 500 employees,91 and can implement mandatory access control MAC or discretionary access control DAC. A further approach, capabilitybased security has been mostly restricted to research operating systems. Capabilities can, however, also be implemented at the language level, leading to a style of programming that is essentially a refinement of standard objectoriented design. An opensource project in the area is the E language. The enduser is widely recognized as the weakest link in the security chain92 and it is estimated that more than 90 of security incidents and breaches involve some kind of human error.9394 Among the most commonly recorded forms of errors and misjudgment are poor password management, sending emails containing sensitive data and attachments to the wrong recipient, the inability to recognize misleading URLs and to identify fake websites and dangerous email attachments. A common mistake that users make is saving their user idpassword in their browsers to make it easier to log in to banking sites. This is a gift to attackers who have obtained access to a machine by some means. The risk may be mitigated by the use of twofactor authentication.95 As the human component of cyber risk is particularly relevant in determining the global cyber risk96 an organization is facing, security awareness training, at all levels, not only provides formal compliance with regulatory and industry mandates but is considered essential97 in reducing cyber risk and protecting individuals and companies from the great majority of cyber threats. The focus on the enduser represents a profound cultural change for many security practitioners, who have traditionally approached cybersecurity exclusively from a technical perspective, and moves along the lines suggested by major security centers98 to develop a culture of cyber awareness within the organization, recognizing that a securityaware user provides an important line of defense against cyber attacks. Related to enduser training, digital hygiene or cyber hygiene is a fundamental principle relating to information security and, as the analogy with personal hygiene shows, is the equivalent of establishing simple routine measures to minimize the risks from cyber threats. The assumption is that good cyber hygiene practices can give networked users another layer of protection, reducing the risk that one vulnerable node will be used to either mount attacks or compromise another node or network, especially from common cyberattacks.99 Cyber hygiene should also not be mistaken for proactive cyber defence, a military term.100 The most common acts of digital hygiene can include updating malware protection, cloud backups, passwords, and ensuring restricted admin rights and network firewalls.101 As opposed to a purely technologybased defense against threats, cyber hygiene mostly regards routine measures that are technically simple to implement and mostly dependent on discipline102 or education.103 It can be thought of as an abstract list of tips or measures that have been demonstrated as having a positive effect on personal or collective digital security. As such, these measures can be performed by laypeople, not just security experts. Cyber hygiene relates to personal hygiene as computer viruses relate to biological viruses or pathogens. However, while the term computer virus was coined almost simultaneously with the creation of the first working computer viruses,104 the term cyber hygiene is a much later invention, perhaps as late as 2000105 by Internet pioneer Vint Cerf. It has since been adopted by the Congress106 and Senate of the United States,107 the FBI,108 EU institutions99 and heads of state.100 Responding to attempted security breaches is often very difficult for a variety of reasons, including Where an attack succeeds and a breach occurs, many jurisdictions now have in place mandatory security breach notification laws. The growth in the number of computer systems and the increasing reliance upon them by individuals, businesses, industries, and governments means that there are an increasing number of systems at risk. The computer systems of financial regulators and financial institutions like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, SWIFT, investment banks, and commercial banks are prominent hacking targets for cybercriminals interested in manipulating markets and making illicit gains.109 Websites and apps that accept or store credit card numbers, brokerage accounts, and bank account information are also prominent hacking targets, because of the potential for immediate financial gain from transferring money, making purchases, or selling the information on the black market.110 Instore payment systems and ATMs have also been tampered with in order to gather customer account data and PINs. The UCLA Internet Report Surveying the Digital Future 2000 found that the privacy of personal data created barriers to online sales and that more than nine out of 10 internet users were somewhat or very concerned about credit card security.111 The most common web technologies for improving security between browsers and websites are named SSL Secure Sockets Layer, and its successor TLS Transport Layer Security, identity management and authentication services, and domain name services allow companies and consumers to engage in secure communications and commerce. Several versions of SSL and TLS are commonly used today in applications such as web browsing, email, internet faxing, instant messaging, and VoIP voiceoverIP. There are various interoperable implementations of these technologies, including at least one implementation that is open source. Open source allows anyone to view the applications source code, and look for and report vulnerabilities. The credit card companies Visa and MasterCard cooperated to develop the secure EMV chip which is embedded in credit cards. Further developments include the Chip Authentication Program where banks give customers handheld card readers to perform online secure transactions. Other developments in this arena include the development of technology such as Instant Issuance which has enabled shopping mall kiosks acting on behalf of banks to issue onthespot credit cards to interested customers. Computers control functions at many utilities, including coordination of telecommunications, the power grid, nuclear power plants, and valve opening and closing in water and gas networks. The Internet is a potential attack vector for such machines if connected, but the Stuxnet worm demonstrated that even equipment controlled by computers not connected to the Internet can be vulnerable. In 2014, the Computer Emergency Readiness Team, a division of the Department of Homeland Security, investigated 79 hacking incidents at energy companies.112 The aviation industry is very reliant on a series of complex systems which could be attacked.113 A simple power outage at one airport can cause repercussions worldwide,114 much of the system relies on radio transmissions which could be disrupted,115 and controlling aircraft over oceans is especially dangerous because radar surveillance only extends 175 to 225 miles offshore.116 There is also potential for attack from within an aircraft.117 Implementing fixes in aerospace systems poses a unique challenge because efficient air transportation is heavily affected by weight and volume. Improving security by adding physical devices to airplanes could increase their unloaded weight, and could potentially reduce cargo or passenger capacity.118 In Europe, with the PanEuropean Network Service119 and NewPENS,120 and in the US with the NextGen program,121 air navigation service providers are moving to create their own dedicated networks. Many modern passports are now biometric passports, containing an embedded microchip that stores a digitized photograph and personal information such as name, gender, and date of birth. In addition, more countrieswhich are introducing facial recognition technology to reduce identityrelated fraud. The introduction of the ePassport has assisted border officials in verifying the identity of the passport holder, thus allowing for quick passenger processing.122 Plans are under way in the US, the UK, and Australia to introduce SmartGate kiosks with both retina and fingerprint recognition technology.123 The airline industry is moving from the use of traditional paper tickets towards the use of electronic tickets etickets. These have been made possible by advances in online credit card transactions in partnership with the airlines. Longdistance bus companieswhich are also switching over to eticketing transactions today. The consequences of a successful attack range from loss of confidentiality to loss of system integrity, air traffic control outages, loss of aircraft, and even loss of life. Desktop computers and laptops are commonly targeted to gather passwords or financial account information or to construct a botnet to attack another target. Smartphones, tablet computers, smart watches, and other mobile devices such as quantified self devices like activity trackers have sensors such as cameras, microphones, GPS receivers, compasses, and accelerometers which could be exploited, and may collect personal information, including sensitive health information. WiFi, Bluetooth, and cell phone networks on any of these devices could be used as attack vectors, and sensors might be remotely activated after a successful breach.124 The increasing number of home automation devices such as the Nest thermostat are also potential targets.124 Today many healthcare providers and health insurance companies use the internet to provide enhanced products and services. Examples are the use of telehealth to potentially offer better quality and access to healthcare, or fitness trackers to lower insurance premiums. Hospitals increasingly use interconnected devices within their networks. This is called Internet of Things IoT.125 Connecting multiple devices within the hospital introduces various benefits, such as automated detection of patient parameters, electronic dose adjustments, and decision support for clinicians.126 However, as these devices serve as potential access points to the hospital network, security threats increase, and hospitals have to introduce adequate security measures which, for example, comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act HIPAA.127 The health care company Humana partners with WebMD, Oracle Corporation, EDS and Microsoft to enable its members to access their health care records, as well as to provide an overview of health care plans.128 Patient records are increasingly being placed on secure inhouse networks, alleviating the need for extra storage space.129 Large corporations are common targets. In many cases attacks are aimed at financial gain through identity theft and involve data breaches. Examples include the loss of millions of clients credit card and financial details by Home Depot,130 Staples,131 Target Corporation,132 and Equifax.133 Medical records have been targeted in general identify theft, health insurance fraud, and impersonating patients to obtain prescription drugs for recreational purposes or resale.134 Although cyber threats continue to increase, 62 of all organizations did not increase security training for their business in 2015.135 Not all attacks are financially motivated, however security firm HBGary Federal had a serious series of attacks in 2011 from hacktivist group Anonymous in retaliation for the firms CEO claiming to have infiltrated their group,136137 and Sony Pictures was hacked in 2014 with the apparent dual motive of embarrassing the company through data leaks and crippling the company by wiping workstations and servers.138139 Vehicles are increasingly computerized, with engine timing, cruise control, antilock brakes, seat belt tensioners, door locks, airbags and advanced driverassistance systems on many models. Additionally, connected cars may use WiFi and Bluetooth to communicate with onboard consumer devices and the cell phone network.140 Selfdriving cars are expected to be even more complex. All of these systems carry some security risks, and such issues have gained wide attention.141142143 Simple examples of risk include a malicious compact disc being used as an attack vector,144 and the cars onboard microphones being used for eavesdropping. However, if access is gained to a cars internal controller area network, the danger is much greater140 and in a widely publicized 2015 test, hackers remotely carjacked a vehicle from 10 miles away and drove it into a ditch.145146 Manufacturers are reacting in numerous ways, with Tesla in 2016 pushing out some security fixes over the air into its cars computer systems.147 In the area of autonomous vehicles, in September 2016 the United States Department of Transportation announced some initial safety standards, and called for states to come up with uniform policies.148149150 Additionally, eDrivers licenses are being developed using the same technology. For example, Mexicos licensing authority ICV has used a smart card platform to issue the first eDrivers licenses to the city of Monterrey, in the state of Nuevo Len.151 Shipping companies152 have adopted RFID Radio Frequency Identification technology as an efficient, digitally secure, tracking device. Unlike a barcode, RFID can be read up to 20 feet away. RFID is used by FedEx153 and UPS.154 Government and military computer systems are commonly attacked by activists155156157 and foreign powers.158159160161 Local and regional government infrastructure such as traffic light controls, police and intelligence agency communications, personnel records, as well as student records.162 The FBI, CIA, and Pentagon, all utilize secure controlled access technology for any of their buildings. However, the use of this form of technology is spreading into the entrepreneurial world. More and more companies are taking advantage of the development of digitally secure controlled access technology. GEs ACUVision, for example, offers a single panel platform for access control, alarm monitoring and digital recording.163 The Internet of things IoT is the network of physical objects such as devices, vehicles, and buildings that are embedded with electronics, software, sensors, and network connectivity that enables them to collect and exchange data.164 Concerns have been raised that this is being developed without appropriate consideration of the security challenges involved.165166 While the IoT creates opportunities for more direct integration of the physical world into computerbased systems,167168 it also provides opportunities for misuse. In particular, as the Internet of Things spreads widely, cyberattacks are likely to become an increasingly physical rather than simply virtual threat.169 If a front doors lock is connected to the Internet, and can be lockedunlocked from a phone, then a criminal could enter the home at the press of a button from a stolen or hacked phone. People could stand to lose much more than their credit card numbers in a world controlled by IoTenabled devices. Thieves have also used electronic means to circumvent nonInternetconnected hotel door locks.170 An attack aimed at physical infrastructure or human lives is often called a cyberkinetic attack. As IoT devices and appliances become more widespread, the prevalence and potential damage of cyberkinetic attacks can increase substantially. Medical devices have either been successfully attacked or had potentially deadly vulnerabilities demonstrated, including both inhospital diagnostic equipment171 and implanted devices including pacemakers172 and insulin pumps.173 There are many reports of hospitals and hospital organizations getting hacked, including ransomware attacks,174175176177 Windows XP exploits,178179 viruses,180181 and data breaches of sensitive data stored on hospital servers.182175183184 On 28 December 2016 the US Food and Drug Administration released its recommendations for how medical device manufacturers should maintain the security of Internetconnected devices but no structure for enforcement.185186 In distributed generation systems, the risk of a cyber attack is real, according to Daily Energy Insider. An attack could cause a loss of power in a large area for a long period of time, and such an attack could have just as severe consequences as a natural disaster. The District of Columbia is considering creating a Distributed Energy Resources DER Authority within the city, with the goal being for customers to have more insight into their own energy use and giving the local electric utility, Pepco, the chance to better estimate energy demand. The D.C. proposal, however, would allow thirdparty vendors to create numerous points of energy distribution, which could potentially create more opportunities for cyber attackers to threaten the electric grid.187 Perhaps the most widely known digitally secure telecommunication device is the SIM Subscriber Identity Module card, a device that is embedded in most of the worlds cellular devices before any service can be obtained. The SIM card is just the beginning of this digitally secure environment. The Smart Card Web Servers draft standard SCWS defines the interfaces to an HTTP server in a smart card.188 Tests are being conducted to secure OTA overtheair payment and credit card information from and to a mobile phone. Combination SIMDVD devices are being developed through Smart Video Card technology which embeds a DVDcompliant optical disc into the card body of a regular SIM card. Other telecommunication developments involving digital security include mobile signatures, which use the embedded SIM card to generate a legally binding electronic signature. Serious financial damage has been caused by security breaches, but because there is no standard model for estimating the cost of an incident, the only data available is that which is made public by the organizations involved. Several computer security consulting firms produce estimates of total worldwide losses attributable to virus and worm attacks and to hostile digital acts in general. The 2003 loss estimates by these firms range from 13 billion worms and viruses only to 226 billion for all forms of covert attacks. The reliability of these estimates is often challenged the underlying methodology is basically anecdotal.189 However, reasonable estimates of the financial cost of security breaches can actually help organizations make rational investment decisions. According to the classic GordonLoeb Model analyzing the optimal investment level in information security, one can conclude that the amount a firm spends to protect information should generally be only a small fraction of the expected loss i.e., the expected value of the loss resulting from a cyberinformation security breach.190 As with physical security, the motivations for breaches of computer security vary between attackers. Some are thrillseekers or vandals, some are activists, others are criminals looking for financial gain. Statesponsored attackers are now common and well resourced but started with amateurs such as Markus Hess who hacked for the KGB, as recounted by Clifford Stoll in The Cuckoos Egg. Attackers motivations can vary for all types of attacks from pleasure to political goals.15 For example, hacktivists may target a company or organization that carries out activities they do not agree with. This would be to create bad publicity for the company by having its website crash. High capability hackers, often with larger backing or state sponsorship, may attack based on the demands of their financial backers. These attacks are more likely to attempt more serious attack. An example of a more serious attack was the 2015 Ukraine power grid hack, which reportedly utilised the spearphising, destruction of files, and denialofservice attacks to carry out the full attack.191192 Additionally, recent attacker motivations can be traced back to extremist organizations seeking to gain political advantage or disrupt social agendas.193 The growth of the internet, mobile technologies, and inexpensive computing devices have led to a rise in capabilities but also to the risk to environments that are deemed as vital to operations. All critical targeted environments are susceptible to compromise and this has led to a series of proactive studies on how to migrate the risk by taking into consideration motivations by these types of actors. Several stark differences exist between the hacker motivation and that of nation state actors seeking to attack based on an ideological preference.194 A key aspect of threat modeling for any system is identifying the motivations behind potential attacks and the individuals or groups likely to carry them out. The level and detail of security measures will differ based on the specific system being protected. For instance, a home personal computer, a bank, and a classified military network each face distinct threats, despite using similar underlying technologies.195 Computer security incident management is an organized approach to addressing and managing the aftermath of a computer security incident or compromise with the goal of preventing a breach or thwarting a cyberattack. An incident that is not identified and managed at the time of intrusion typically escalates to a more damaging event such as a data breach or system failure. The intended outcome of a computer security incident response plan is to contain the incident, limit damage and assist recovery to business as usual. Responding to compromises quickly can mitigate exploited vulnerabilities, restore services and processes and minimize losses.196 Incident response planning allows an organization to establish a series of best practices to stop an intrusion before it causes damage. Typical incident response plans contain a set of written instructions that outline the organizations response to a cyberattack. Without a documented plan in place, an organization may not successfully detect an intrusion or compromise and stakeholders may not understand their roles, processes and procedures during an escalation, slowing the organizations response and resolution. There are four key components of a computer security incident response plan Some illustrative examples of different types of computer security breaches are given below. In 1988, 60,000 computers were connected to the Internet, and most were mainframes, minicomputers and professional workstations. On 2 November 1988, many started to slow down, because they were running a malicious code that demanded processor time and that spread itself to other computers the first internet computer worm.198 The software was traced back to 23yearold Cornell University graduate student Robert Tappan Morris who said he wanted to count how many machines were connected to the Internet.198 In 1994, over a hundred intrusions were made by unidentified crackers into the Rome Laboratory, the US Air Forces main command and research facility. Using trojan horses, hackers were able to obtain unrestricted access to Romes networking systems and remove traces of their activities. The intruders were able to obtain classified files, such as air tasking order systems data and furthermore able to penetrate connected networks of National Aeronautics and Space Administrations Goddard Space Flight Center, WrightPatterson Air Force Base, some Defense contractors, and other private sector organizations, by posing as a trusted Rome center user.199 In early 2007, American apparel and home goods company TJX announced that it was the victim of an unauthorized computer systems intrusion200 and that the hackers had accessed a system that stored data on credit card, debit card, check, and merchandise return transactions.201 In 2010, the computer worm known as Stuxnet reportedly ruined almost onefifth of Irans nuclear centrifuges.202 It did so by disrupting industrial programmable logic controllers PLCs in a targeted attack. This is generally believed to have been launched by Israel and the United States to disrupt Irans nuclear program203204205206 although neither has publicly admitted this. In early 2013, documents provided by Edward Snowden were published by The Washington Post and The Guardian207208 exposing the massive scale of NSA global surveillance. There were also indications that the NSA may have inserted a backdoor in a NIST standard for encryption.209 This standard was later withdrawn due to widespread criticism.210 The NSA additionally were revealed to have tapped the links between Googles data centers.211 A Ukrainian hacker known as Rescator broke into Target Corporation computers in 2013, stealing roughly 40 million credit cards,212 and then Home Depot computers in 2014, stealing between 53 and 56 million credit card numbers.213 Warnings were delivered at both corporations, but ignored physical security breaches using self checkout machines are believed to have played a large role. The malware utilized is absolutely unsophisticated and uninteresting, says Jim Walter, director of threat intelligence operations at security technology company McAfee meaning that the heists could have easily been stopped by existing antivirus software had administrators responded to the warnings. The size of the thefts has resulted in major attention from state and Federal United States authorities and the investigation is ongoing. In April 2015, the Office of Personnel Management discovered it had been hacked more than a year earlier in a data breach, resulting in the theft of approximately 21.5 million personnel records handled by the office.214 The Office of Personnel Management hack has been described by federal officials as among the largest breaches of government data in the history of the United States.215 Data targeted in the breach included personally identifiable information such as Social Security numbers, names, dates and places of birth, addresses, and fingerprints of current and former government employees as well as anyone who had undergone a government background check.216217 It is believed the hack was perpetrated by Chinese hackers.218 In July 2015, a hacker group is known as The Impact Team successfully breached the extramarital relationship website Ashley Madison, created by Avid Life Media. The group claimed that they had taken not only company data but user data as well. After the breach, The Impact Team dumped emails from the companys CEO, to prove their point, and threatened to dump customer data unless the website was taken down permanently.219 When Avid Life Media did not take the site offline the group released two more compressed files, one 9.7GB and the second 20GB. After the second data dump, Avid Life Media CEO Noel Biderman resigned but the website remained to function. In June 2021, the cyber attack took down the largest fuel pipeline in the U.S. and led to shortages across the East Coast.220 International legal issues of cyber attacks are complicated in nature. There is no global base of common rules to judge, and eventually punish, cybercrimes and cybercriminals and where security firms or agencies do locate the cybercriminal behind the creation of a particular piece of malware or form of cyber attack, often the local authorities cannot take action due to lack of laws under which to prosecute.221222 Proving attribution for cybercrimes and cyberattacks is also a major problem for all law enforcement agencies. Computer viruses switch from one country to another, from one jurisdiction to another moving around the world, using the fact that we dont have the capability to globally police operations like this. So the Internet is as if someone had given free plane tickets to all the online criminals of the world.221 The use of techniques such as dynamic DNS, fast flux and bullet proof servers add to the difficulty of investigation and enforcement. The role of the government is to make regulations to force companies and organizations to protect their systems, infrastructure and information from any cyberattacks, but also to protect its own national infrastructure such as the national powergrid.223 The governments regulatory role in cyberspace is complicated. For some, cyberspace was seen as a virtual space that was to remain free of government intervention, as can be seen in many of todays libertarian blockchain and bitcoin discussions.224 Many government officials and experts think that the government should do more and that there is a crucial need for improved regulation, mainly due to the failure of the private sector to solve efficiently the cybersecurity problem. R. Clarke said during a panel discussion at the RSA Security Conference in San Francisco, he believes that the industry only responds when you threaten regulation. If the industry doesnt respond to the threat, you have to follow through.225 On the other hand, executives from the private sector agree that improvements are necessary, but think that government intervention would affect their ability to innovate efficiently. Daniel R. McCarthy analyzed this publicprivate partnership in cybersecurity and reflected on the role of cybersecurity in the broader constitution of political order.226 On 22 May 2020, the UN Security Council held its second ever informal meeting on cybersecurity to focus on cyber challenges to international peace. According to UN SecretaryGeneral Antnio Guterres, new technologies are too often used to violate rights.227 Many different teams and organizations exist, including On 14 April 2016, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union adopted the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR. The GDPR, which came into force on 25 May 2018, grants individuals within the European Union EU and the European Economic Area EEA the right to the protection of personal data. The regulation requires that any entity that processes personal data incorporate data protection by design and by default. It also requires that certain organizations appoint a Data Protection Officer DPO. Most countries have their own computer emergency response team to protect network security. Since 2010, Canada has had a cybersecurity strategy.233234 This functions as a counterpart document to the National Strategy and Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure.235 The strategy has three main pillars securing government systems, securing vital private cyber systems, and helping Canadians to be secure online.234235 There is also a Cyber Incident Management Framework to provide a coordinated response in the event of a cyber incident.236237 The Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre CCIRC is responsible for mitigating and responding to threats to Canadas critical infrastructure and cyber systems. It provides support to mitigate cyber threats, technical support to respond recover from targeted cyber attacks, and provides online tools for members of Canadas critical infrastructure sectors.238 It posts regular cybersecurity bulletins239 operates an online reporting tool where individuals and organizations can report a cyber incident.240 To inform the general public on how to protect themselves online, Public Safety Canada has partnered with STOP.THINK.CONNECT, a coalition of nonprofit, private sector, and government organizations,241 and launched the Cyber Security Cooperation Program.242243 They also run the GetCyberSafe portal for Canadian citizens, and Cyber Security Awareness Month during October.244 Public Safety Canada aims to begin an evaluation of Canadas cybersecurity strategy in early 2015.235 Australian federal government announced an 18.2 million investment to fortify the cybersecurity resilience of small and medium enterprises SMEs and enhance their capabilities in responding to cyber threats. This financial backing is an integral component of the soontobeunveiled 20232030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy, slated for release within the current week. A substantial allocation of 7.2 million is earmarked for the establishment of a voluntary cyber health check program, facilitating businesses in conducting a comprehensive and tailored selfassessment of their cybersecurity upskill. This avantgarde health assessment serves as a diagnostic tool, enabling enterprises to ascertain the robustness of Australias cyber security regulations. Furthermore, it affords them access to a repository of educational resources and materials, fostering the acquisition of skills necessary for an elevated cybersecurity posture. This groundbreaking initiative was jointly disclosed by Minister for Cyber Security Clare ONeil and Minister for Small Business Julie Collins.245 Some provisions for cybersecurity have been incorporated into rules framed under the Information Technology Act 2000.246 The National Cyber Security Policy 2013 is a policy framework by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology MeitY which aims to protect the public and private infrastructure from cyberattacks, and safeguard information, such as personal information of web users, financial and banking information and sovereign data. CERT In is the nodal agency which monitors the cyber threats in the country. The post of National Cyber Security Coordinator has also been created in the Prime Ministers Office PMO. The Indian Companies Act 2013 has also introduced cyber law and cybersecurity obligations on the part of Indian directors. Some provisions for cybersecurity have been incorporated into rules framed under the Information Technology Act 2000 Update in 2013.247 Following cyberattacks in the first half of 2013, when the government, news media, television stations, and bank websites were compromised, the national government committed to the training of 5,000 new cybersecurity experts by 2017. The South Korean government blamed its northern counterpart for these attacks, as well as incidents that occurred in 2009, 2011,248 and 2012, but Pyongyang denies the accusations.249 The United States has its first fully formed cyber plan in 15 years, as a result of the release of this National Cyber plan.250 In this policy, the US says it will Protect the country by keeping networks, systems, functions, and data safe Promote American wealth by building a strong digital economy and encouraging strong domestic innovation Peace and safety should be kept by making it easier for the US to stop people from using computer tools for bad things, working with friends and partners to do this and increase the United States impact around the world to support the main ideas behind an open, safe, reliable, and compatible Internet.251 The new U.S. cyber strategy252 seeks to allay some of those concerns by promoting responsible behavior in cyberspace, urging nations to adhere to a set of norms, both through international law and voluntary standards. It also calls for specific measures to harden U.S. government networks from attacks, like the June 2015 intrusion into the U.S. Office of Personnel Management OPM, which compromised the records of about 4.2 million current and former government employees. And the strategy calls for the U.S. to continue to name and shame bad cyber actors, calling them out publicly for attacks when possible, along with the use of economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure.253 The 1986 18 U.S.C. 1030, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act is the key legislation. It prohibits unauthorized access or damage of protected computers as defined in 18 U.S.C. 1030e2. Although various other measures have been proposed254255 none have succeeded. In 2013, executive order 13636 Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity was signed, which prompted the creation of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. In response to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack256 President Joe Biden signed Executive Order 14028257 on May 12, 2021, to increase software security standards for sales to the government, tighten detection and security on existing systems, improve information sharing and training, establish a Cyber Safety Review Board, and improve incident response. The General Services Administration GSA haswhen standardized the penetration test service as a prevetted support service, to rapidly address potential vulnerabilities, and stop adversaries before they impact US federal, state and local governments. These services are commonly referred to as Highly Adaptive Cybersecurity Services HACS. The Department of Homeland Security has a dedicated division responsible for the response system, risk management program and requirements for cybersecurity in the United States called the National Cyber Security Division.258259 The division is home to USCERT operations and the National Cyber Alert System.259 The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center brings together government organizations responsible for protecting computer networks and networked infrastructure.260 The third priority of the FBI is to Protect the United States against cyberbased attacks and hightechnology crimes,261 and they, along with the National White Collar Crime Center NW3C, and the Bureau of Justice Assistance BJA are part of the multiagency task force, The Internet Crime Complaint Center, also known as IC3.262 In addition to its own specific duties, the FBI participates alongside nonprofit organizations such as InfraGard.263264 The Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section CCIPS operates in the United States Department of Justice Criminal Division. The CCIPS is in charge of investigating computer crime and intellectual property crime and is specialized in the search and seizure of digital evidence in computers and networks.265 In 2017, CCIPS published A Framework for a Vulnerability Disclosure Program for Online Systems to help organizations clearly describe authorized vulnerability disclosure and discovery conduct, thereby substantially reducing the likelihood that such described activities will result in a civil or criminal violation of law under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 18 U.S.C. 1030.266 The United States Cyber Command, also known as USCYBERCOM, has the mission to direct, synchronize, and coordinate cyberspace planning and operations to defend and advance national interests in collaboration with domestic and international partners.267 It has no role in the protection of civilian networks.268269 The U.S. Federal Communications Commissions role in cybersecurity is to strengthen the protection of critical communications infrastructure, to assist in maintaining the reliability of networks during disasters, to aid in swift recovery after, and to ensure that first responders have access to effective communications services.270 The Food and Drug Administration has issued guidance for medical devices,271 and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration272 is concerned with automotive cybersecurity. After being criticized by the Government Accountability Office,273 and following successful attacks on airports and claimed attacks on airplanes, the Federal Aviation Administration has devoted funding to securing systems on board the planes of private manufacturers, and the Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System.274 Concerns have also been raised about the future Next Generation Air Transportation System.275 The US Department of Defense DoD issued DoD Directive 8570 in 2004, supplemented by DoD Directive 8140, requiring all DoD employees and all DoD contract personnel involved in information assurance roles and activities to earn and maintain various industry Information Technology IT certifications in an effort to ensure that all DoD personnel involved in network infrastructure defense have minimum levels of IT industry recognized knowledge, skills and abilities KSA. Andersson and Reimers 2019 report these certifications range from CompTIAs A and Security through the ICS2.orgs CISSP, etc.276 Computer emergency response team is a name given to expert groups that handle computer security incidents. In the US, two distinct organizations exist, although they do work closely together. In the context of U.S. nuclear power plants, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission NRC outlines cybersecurity requirements under 10 CFR Part 73, specifically in 73.54.278 The Nuclear Energy Institutes NEI 0809 document, Cyber Security Plan for Nuclear Power Reactors,279 outlines a comprehensive framework for cybersecurity in the nuclear power industry. Drafted with input from the U.S. NRC, this guideline is instrumental in aiding licensees to comply with the Code of Federal Regulations CFR, which mandates robust protection of digital computers and equipment and communications systems at nuclear power plants against cyber threats.280 There is growing concern that cyberspace will become the next theater of warfare. As Mark Clayton from The Christian Science Monitor wrote in a 2015 article titled The New Cyber Arms Race In the future, wars will not just be fought by soldiers with guns or with planes that drop bombs. They will also be fought with the click of a mouse a half a world away that unleashes carefully weaponized computer programs that disrupt or destroy critical industries like utilities, transportation, communications, and energy. Such attacks could also disable military networks that control the movement of troops, the path of jet fighters, the command and control of warships.281 This has led to new terms such as cyberwarfare and cyberterrorism. The United States Cyber Command was created in 2009282 and many other countries have similar forces. There are a few critical voices that question whether cybersecurity is as significant a threat as it is made out to be.283284285 Cybersecurity is a fastgrowing field of IT concerned with reducing organizations risk of hack or data breaches.286 According to research from the Enterprise Strategy Group, 46 of organizations say that they have a problematic shortage of cybersecurity skills in 2016, up from 28 in 2015.287 Commercial, government and nongovernmental organizations all employ cybersecurity professionals. The fastest increases in demand for cybersecurity workers are in industries managing increasing volumes of consumer data such as finance, health care, and retail.288 However, the use of the term cybersecurity is more prevalent in government job descriptions.289 Typical cybersecurity job titles and descriptions include290 Student programs are also available for people interested in beginning a career in cybersecurity.294295 Meanwhile, a flexible and effective option for information security professionals of all experience levels to keep studying is online security training, including webcasts.296297 A wide range of certified courses are also available.298 In the United Kingdom, a nationwide set of cybersecurity forums, known as the U.K Cyber Security Forum, were established supported by the Governments cybersecurity strategy299 in order to encourage startups and innovation and to address the skills gap300 identified by the U.K Government. In Singapore, the Cyber Security Agency has issued a Singapore Operational Technology OT Cybersecurity Competency Framework OTCCF. The framework defines emerging cybersecurity roles in Operational Technology. The OTCCF was endorsed by the Infocomm Media Development Authority IMDA. It outlines the different OT cybersecurity job positions as well as the technical skills and core competencies necessary. It also depicts the many career paths available, including vertical and lateral advancement opportunities.301 The following terms used with regards to computer security are explained below Since the Internets arrival and with the digital transformation initiated in recent years, the notion of cybersecurity has become a familiar subject in both our professional and personal lives. Cybersecurity and cyber threats have been consistently present for the last 60 years of technological change. In the 1970s and 1980s, computer security was mainly limited to academia until the conception of the Internet, where, with increased connectivity, computer viruses and network intrusions began to take off. After the spread of viruses in the 1990s, the 2000s marked the institutionalization of organized attacks such as distributed denial of service.305 This led to the formalization of cybersecurity as a professional discipline.306 The April 1967 session organized by Willis Ware at the Spring Joint Computer Conference, and the later publication of the Ware Report, were foundational moments in the history of the field of computer security.307 Wares work straddled the intersection of material, cultural, political, and social concerns.307 A 1977 NIST publication308 introduced the CIA triad of confidentiality, integrity, and availability as a clear and simple way to describe key security goals.309 While still relevant, many more elaborate frameworks have since been proposed.310311 However, in the 1970s and 1980s, there were no grave computer threats because computers and the internet were still developing, and security threats were easily identifiable. More often, threats came from malicious insiders who gained unauthorized access to sensitive documents and files. Although malware and network breaches existed during the early years, they did not use them for financial gain. By the second half of the 1970s, established computer firms like IBM started offering commercial access control systems and computer security software products.312 One of the earliest examples of an attack on a computer network was the computer worm Creeper written by Bob Thomas at BBN, which propagated through the ARPANET in 1971.313 The program was purely experimental in nature and carried no malicious payload. A later program, Reaper, was created by Ray Tomlinson in 1972 and used to destroy Creeper.citation needed Between September 1986 and June 1987, a group of German hackers performed the first documented case of cyber espionage.314 The group hacked into American defense contractors, universities, and military base networks and sold gathered information to the Soviet KGB. The group was led by Markus Hess, who was arrested on 29 June 1987. He was convicted of espionage along with two coconspirators on 15 Feb 1990. In 1988, one of the first computer worms, called the Morris worm, was distributed via the Internet. It gained significant mainstream media attention.315 In 1993, Netscape started developing the protocol SSL, shortly after the National Center for Supercomputing Applications NCSA launched Mosaic 1.0, the first web browser, in 1993.citation needed316 Netscape had SSL version 1.0 ready in 1994, but it was never released to the public due to many serious security vulnerabilities. These weaknesses included replay attacks and a vulnerability that allowed hackers to alter unencrypted communications sent by users. However, in February 1995, Netscape launched Version 2.0.317 The National Security Agency NSA is responsible for the protection of U.S. information systems and also for collecting foreign intelligence.318 The agency analyzes commonly used software and system configurations to find security flaws, which it can use for offensive purposes against competitors of the United States.319 NSA contractors created and sold clickandshoot attack tools to US agencies and close allies, but eventually, the tools made their way to foreign adversaries.320 In 2016, NSAs own hacking tools were hacked, and they have been used by Russia and North Korea.citation needed NSAs employees and contractors have been recruited at high salaries by adversaries, anxious to compete in cyberwarfare.citation needed In 2007, the United States and Israel began exploiting security flaws in the Microsoft Windows operating system to attack and damage equipment used in Iran to refine nuclear materials. Iran responded by heavily investing in their own cyberwarfare capability, which it began using against the United States.319